README.md, before:

![Postgres Language Server](/docs/images/pls-github.png)

# Postgres Language Server

A Language Server for Postgres. Not SQL with flavours, just Postgres.

## Status

🚧 This is in active development and is only ready for experimental use.

## Motivation

Despite an ever rising popularity of Postgres, support for the PostgreSQL language in the IDE or editor of your choice is still limited. There are a few proprietary ones (e.g. [DataGrip](https://www.jetbrains.com/datagrip/)) that work well, but are only available within the respective IDE. Open Source attempts (e.g. [sql-language-server](https://github.com/joe-re/sql-language-server), [pgFormatter](https://github.com/darold/pgFormatter/tree/master), [sql-parser-cst](https://github.com/nene/sql-parser-cst)) provide a generic SQL language server, implementing the Postgres syntax as a flavor of their parser. This always falls short due to the ever evolving and complex syntax of PostgreSQL. 

This project will only support PostgreSQL, leveraging parts of the PostgreSQL source (see [libg_query](https://github.com/pganalyze/libpg_query)) to parse the source code reliabaly. This is slightly crazy, but is the only reliable way of parsing all valid PostgreSQL queries. You can find a longer rationale on why This is the way™ [here](https://pganalyze.com/blog/parse-postgresql-queries-in-ruby). Of course, libg_query was built to execute SQL, and not to build a language server, but all of the resulting shortcomings were successfully mitigated in the `parser` crate. Read the [commented source code](./crates/parser/src/lib.rs) for more details on the inner workings of the parser.

Once the parser is stable, and a robust and scalable data model is implemented, the language server will not only provide basic features such as semantic highlighting, code completion and syntax error diagnostics, but also serve as the user interface for all the great tooling of the Postgres ecosystem.

## Roadmap

This is a proof of concept for building both a concrete syntax tree and an abstract syntax tree from a potentially malformed PostgreSQL source code. The `postgres_lsp` crate was created to prove that it works end-to-end, and is just a very basic language server with semantic highlighting and error diagnostics. Before further feature development, we have to complete a bit of groundwork:

1. _Finish the parser_
   - The parser works, but the enum values for all the different syntax elements and internal conversations are manually written or copied, and, in some places, only cover a few elements required for a simple select statement. To have full coverage without possibilities for a copy and paste error, they should be generated from `pg_query.rs` source code.
   - There are a few cases such as nested and named dollar quoted strings that cause the parser to fail due to limitations of the regex-based lexer. Nothing that is impossible to fix, or requires any fundamental change in the parser though.
2. _Implement a robust and scalable data model_
   - This is still in a research phase
   - A great rationale on the importance of the data model in a language server can be found [here](https://matklad.github.io/2023/05/06/zig-language-server-and-cancellation.html)
   - `rust-analyzer`s [`base-db` crate](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-analyzer/tree/master/crates/base-db) will serve as a role model
   - The [`salsa`](https://github.com/salsa-rs/salsa) crate will most likely be the underlying data structure
3. _Setup the language server properly_
   - This is still in a research phase
   - Once again `rust-analyzer` will serve as a role model, and we will most likely implement the same queueing and cancellation approach
4. _Implement basic language server features_
   - Semantic Highlighting
   - Syntax Error Diagnostics
   - Show SQL comments on hover
   - Auto-Completion
   - Code Actions, such as `Execute the statement under the cursor`, or `Execute the current file`
   - ... anything you can think of really
5. _Integrate all the existing open source tooling_
   - Show migration file lint errors from [squawk](https://github.com/sbdchd/squawk)
   - Show plpsql lint errors from [plpsql_check](https://github.com/okbob/plpgsql_check)
6. _Build missing pieces_
   - An optionated code formatter (think prettier for PostgreSQL)
7. _(Maybe) Support advanced features with declarative schema management_
   - Jump to definition
   - ... anything you can think of really

## Installation 

Do not do this yet! (Unless you want to help with development)

### Neovim

Add the postgres_lsp executable to your path, and add the following to your config to use it.

```lua
require('lspconfig.configs').postgres_lsp = {
  default_config = {
    name = 'postgres_lsp',
    cmd = {'postgres_lsp'},
    filetypes = {'sql'},
    single_file_support = true,
    root_dir = util.root_pattern 'root-file.txt'
  }
}

lsp.configure("postgres_lsp", {force_setup = true})
```

## Contributors

- [psteinroe](https://github.com/psteinroe) (Maintainer)

## Acknowledgments

- [rust-analyzer](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-analyzer) for implementing such a robust, well documented, and feature-rich language server. Great place to learn from.
- [squawk](https://github.com/sbdchd/squawk) and [pganalyze](https://pganalyze.com) for inspiring the use of libg_query.

Commit message:

feat: add features to readme

README.md, after:

![Postgres Language Server](/docs/images/pls-github.png)

# Postgres Language Server

A Language Server for Postgres. Not SQL with flavours, just Postgres.

## Status

🚧 This is in active development and is only ready for experimental use.

## Features

The [Language Server Protocol](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/) is an open protocol between code editors and servers that provide the code intelligence tools you are used to work with such as code completion, syntax highlighting, and many more. This project implements such a language server for Postgres, significantly enhancing the dx right within your favorite editor by adding:

- Semantic Highlighting
- Syntax Error Diagnostics
- Show SQL comments on hover
- Auto-Completion
- Code actions such as `Execute the statement under the cursor`, or `Execute the current file`
- Optionated Code Formatting
- ... and many more

## Motivation

Despite an ever rising popularity of Postgres, support for the PostgreSQL language in the IDE or editor of your choice is still limited. There are a few proprietary ones (e.g. [DataGrip](https://www.jetbrains.com/datagrip/)) that work well, but are only available within the respective IDE. Open Source attempts (e.g. [sql-language-server](https://github.com/joe-re/sql-language-server), [pgFormatter](https://github.com/darold/pgFormatter/tree/master), [sql-parser-cst](https://github.com/nene/sql-parser-cst)) provide a generic SQL language server, implementing the Postgres syntax as a flavor of their parser. This always falls short due to the ever evolving and complex syntax of PostgreSQL.

This project will only support PostgreSQL, leveraging parts of the PostgreSQL source (see [libg_query](https://github.com/pganalyze/libpg_query)) to parse the source code reliabaly. This is slightly crazy, but is the only reliable way of parsing all valid PostgreSQL queries. You can find a longer rationale on why This is the way™ [here](https://pganalyze.com/blog/parse-postgresql-queries-in-ruby). Of course, libg_query was built to execute SQL, and not to build a language server, but all of the resulting shortcomings were successfully mitigated in the `parser` crate. Read the [commented source code](./crates/parser/src/lib.rs) for more details on the inner workings of the parser.

Once the parser is stable, and a robust and scalable data model is implemented, the language server will not only provide basic features such as semantic highlighting, code completion and syntax error diagnostics, but also serve as the user interface for all the great tooling of the Postgres ecosystem.

## Roadmap

This is a proof of concept for building both a concrete syntax tree and an abstract syntax tree from a potentially malformed PostgreSQL source code. The `postgres_lsp` crate was created to prove that it works end-to-end, and is just a very basic language server with semantic highlighting and error diagnostics. Before further feature development, we have to complete a bit of groundwork:

1. _Finish the parser_
   - The parser works, but the enum values for all the different syntax elements and internal conversations are manually written or copied, and, in some places, only cover a few elements required for a simple select statement. To have full coverage without possibilities for a copy and paste error, they should be generated from `pg_query.rs` source code.
   - There are a few cases such as nested and named dollar quoted strings that cause the parser to fail due to limitations of the regex-based lexer. Nothing that is impossible to fix, or requires any fundamental change in the parser though.
2. _Implement a robust and scalable data model_
   - This is still in a research phase
   - A great rationale on the importance of the data model in a language server can be found [here](https://matklad.github.io/2023/05/06/zig-language-server-and-cancellation.html)
   - `rust-analyzer`s [`base-db` crate](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-analyzer/tree/master/crates/base-db) will serve as a role model
   - The [`salsa`](https://github.com/salsa-rs/salsa) crate will most likely be the underlying data structure
3. _Setup the language server properly_
   - This is still in a research phase
   - Once again `rust-analyzer` will serve as a role model, and we will most likely implement the same queueing and cancellation approach
4. _Implement basic language server features_
   - Semantic Highlighting
   - Syntax Error Diagnostics
   - Show SQL comments on hover
   - Auto-Completion
   - Code Actions, such as `Execute the statement under the cursor`, or `Execute the current file`
   - ... anything you can think of really
5. _Integrate all the existing open source tooling_
   - Show migration file lint errors from [squawk](https://github.com/sbdchd/squawk)
   - Show plpsql lint errors from [plpsql_check](https://github.com/okbob/plpgsql_check)
6. _Build missing pieces_
   - An optionated code formatter (think prettier for PostgreSQL)
7. _(Maybe) Support advanced features with declarative schema management_
   - Jump to definition
   - ... anything you can think of really

## Installation

Do not do this yet! (Unless you want to help with development)

### Neovim

Add the postgres_lsp executable to your path, and add the following to your config to use it.

```lua
require('lspconfig.configs').postgres_lsp = {
  default_config = {
    name = 'postgres_lsp',
    cmd = {'postgres_lsp'},
    filetypes = {'sql'},
    single_file_support = true,
    root_dir = util.root_pattern 'root-file.txt'
  }
}

lsp.configure("postgres_lsp", {force_setup = true})
```

## Contributors

- [psteinroe](https://github.com/psteinroe) (Maintainer)

## Acknowledgments

- [rust-analyzer](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-analyzer) for implementing such a robust, well documented, and feature-rich language server. Great place to learn from.
- [squawk](https://github.com/sbdchd/squawk) and [pganalyze](https://pganalyze.com) for inspiring the use of libg_query.
